add blog on how to use starlark in Woodpecker CI (#164)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/woodpeckerCI/woodpeckerCI.md

---
title: Starlark-Powered Pipelines in Woodpecker CI
authorName: Prashant Gurung
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/53248463?v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/prashant-gurung899
createdAt: July 3, 2025

> tags: CI/CD

Reviewer: More tags can be added, like Woodpecker, starlark, etc.

banner: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/cover.png
---

## Background

> Continuous Integration (CI) tools are vital for automating the testing and deployment of modern software. One such open-source tool is Woodpecker CI, a lightweight CI/CD system. Woodpecker CI is an open-source continuous integration and delivery platform that helps developers automate building, testing, and deploying their code. It is a community-driven fork and successor of the popular Drone CI project, sharing many design principles and compatibility with Drone pipelines. Traditionally, Woodpecker pipelines are written in YAML. But with the rise of programmable pipelines, we now have the flexibility to define our CI configuration using Starlark — a Python-like configuration language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuous Integration (CI) tools are vital for automating the testing and deployment of modern software. One such open-source tool is Woodpecker CI, a lightweight CI/CD system. Woodpecker CI is an open-source continuous integration and delivery platform that help developers automate building, testing, and deploying their code. It is a community-driven fork and successor of the popular Drone CI project, sharing many design principles and compatibility with Drone pipelines. Traditionally, Woodpecker pipelines are written in YAML. But with the rise of programmable pipelines, we now have the flexibility to define our CI configuration using Starlark — a Python-like configuration language.
```

In this blog, I’ll walk you through setting up Woodpecker CI with Traefik as a reverse proxy and integrating it with WCCS (Woodpecker CI Config Service) to convert Starlark configurations into YAML files, enabling us to write pipelines in .woodpecker.star files. Here's a high-level view of what we'll cover:

- Spinning up a Woodpecker server with Traefik

- Authenticating with GitHub

- Enabling a repository

- Connecting WCCS with the Woodpecker server

By the end, you’ll be able to write CI pipelines in Starlark and dynamically convert them to YAML during runtime.

## Prepare Woodpecker secrets via .env
```console
#Your woodpecker host
WOODPECKER_HOST=https://<your-ci-server>

# GitHub OAuth Secrets
WOODPECKER_GITHUB_CLIENT=XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

> WOODPECKER_GITHUB_SECRET=XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

Reviewer 2: Link for getting these secrets would be better

# Shared secret used by server<->agent - you can generate it using openSSL
WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET=<generated-secret>

> # Let’s Encrypt contact email (Traefik will use this)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Let’s encrypt contact email (Traefik will use this)
```

ACME_EMAIL=admin@example.com
```

> ## Traefik Configuration

Reviewer 3: wait, we have we already finished doing the woodpecker setup? You told me to create woodpecker settings in dome .env file, now there is magic traefik configs. Where to put that and what about woodpecker?

Author: Can you please elaborate more? i am confused with your question.

Reviewer 3: think if there is a more logical flow of steps.
Also the values you don't add here at all, basically you just create a frame of the file

Author: I have remove the .env and added few comments on the variable in compose file itself and also changed the flow

> Traefik plays a crucial role in this architecture by handling all the networking complexities - SSL termination, routing, and load balancing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik plays a crucial role in this architecture by handling all the networking complexities - SSL termination, routing, and load balancing.
```

```yml
version: "3.9"

services:
  traefik:
    image: traefik:v3.1
    container_name: traefik
    command:
      - "--log.level=DEBUG"
      - "--providers.docker=true"
      - "--providers.docker.exposedbydefault=false"
      - "--entrypoints.web.address=:80"
      - "--entrypoints.websecure.address=:443"
      - "--certificatesresolvers.letsencrypt.acme.httpchallenge=true"
      - "--certificatesresolvers.letsencrypt.acme.httpchallenge.entrypoint=web"
      - "--certificatesresolvers.letsencrypt.acme.email=${ACME_EMAIL}"
      - "--certificatesresolvers.letsencrypt.acme.storage=/letsencrypt/acme.json"
    ports:
      - "80:80"
      - "443:443"
    volumes:
      - "./letsencrypt:/letsencrypt"
      - "/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro"
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

> ```

Reviewer 4: I am confused where to these snippets 🤔

This configuration:

- Sets up Traefik to listen on ports 80 and 443

> - Configures Let's Encrypt for automatic SSL certificate management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configures automatic SSL certificate management
```

Author: Thank you.
I was actually trying to mention https://letsencrypt.org/ here.
I will update accordingly

      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-secure.tls=true"
      - "traefik.http.services.woodpecker-secure.loadbalancer.server.port=8000"
      # HTTP router + redirect to HTTPS
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.rule=Host(`your-ci-server`)"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.entrypoints=web"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.middlewares=redirect-to-https"
      # Redirect middleware
      - "traefik.http.middlewares.redirect-to-https.redirectscheme.scheme=https"
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

  woodpecker-agent:
    image: woodpeckerci/woodpecker-agent:v3
    command: agent
    restart: always
    depends_on:
      - woodpecker-server
    volumes:
      - woodpecker-agent-config:/etc/woodpecker
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    environment:
      - WOODPECKER_LOG_LEVEL=debug
      - WOODPECKER_SERVER=woodpecker-server:9000
      - WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET=${WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET}
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net
```

## Authenticating with GitHub

To connect GitHub with Woodpecker:

1. Register a new OAuth application in your GitHub developer settings.

> 2. Set the callback URL to `https://<your-ci-server>/authorize`

Reviewer 3: where and how do I do this? If you don't want to describe details link at least a documentation

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

3. Copy the generated Client ID and Secret.

4. Use these values in the `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_CLIENT` and `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_SECRET` env vars.

After that, you can log into the Woodpecker web UI using your GitHub account.

![GitHub Login](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/github.png)

## Enabling a Repository
From the Woodpecker UI:

- Click on Add Repository.

![Add Repo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/add.png)

- Enable it.

![Enable Repo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/enable.png)

Woodpecker will automatically add the necessary webhooks to the repo.

After enabling your desired repository, there's one more thing that you need to do i.e. to set pipeline config path.

> - From the settings of your Woodpecker Server, go to repositories and click on the enabled repo's settings icon as shown below:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- From the settings of your Woodpecker server, go to `Repositories` and click on the enabled repo's settings icon as shown below:
```

![Settings](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/settings.png)

> - Then, add `.woodpecker.star` as pipeline config path and save it:

Reviewer 3: maybe move that further down into the wccs part and have a in-between-step saying that now one can already write and create pipelines using YAML, but we will go an step further and integrate with WCCS

Author: I have moved it down. Please let me know if that's more confusing or not

![Pipeline Config](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/path.png)

## Generating the Public Key

> Every request sent by Woodpecker is signed using a http-signature by a private key (ed25519) generated on the first start of the Woodpecker server. You can get the public key for the verification of the http-signature from:

Reviewer 3: Which requests is Woodpecker sending where? Are those the requests to GitHub?

where are those keys stored? when restarting the container will they be gone?

Author: The private key generation is done by the server itself and store inside the volume. When restarting the container, they will not be gone unless the volumes are also removed.

Author: And those requests are to the external config service, which in our case is WCCS.
I have updated the paragraph again

```console

> http(s)://your-ci-server/api/signature/public-key

Reviewer 3: can it be http with the setup above?
which of the parts in that URL are place-holders and what are real values? They all look the same

```

## Connecting WCCS with Woodpecker
To allow Woodpecker to fetch pipeline configs from WCCS, we added this to the server env:
```console
WOODPECKER_CONFIG_SERVICE_ENDPOINT=http://wccs:8080/ciconfig
```
Woodpecker now sends a signed JSON payload to WCCS whenever a build is triggered. WCCS verifies the signature using the public key and responds with a YAML pipeline based on your .woodpecker.star file.

## Add a Simple Starlark Pipeline
Here's a simple `.woodpecker.star` example that you can add in your project's root and you're all set:
```console
def main(ctx):
    return [{
        "name": "hello",
        "steps": [
            {
                "name": "greeting",
                "image": "alpine",
                "commands": [
                    "echo Hello from CI",
                ],
                "when": {
                    "event": ["push", "pull_request"],
                    "branch": ["master"],
                },
            }
        ]
    }]
```

## Triggering Your First CI Run
Now that you have your `.woodpecker.star` file ready, commit and push it to your GitHub repository and then, open a Pull Request from your branch <your-branch-name> to master.

> Once the PR is created, Woodpecker will automatically send the build request to WCCS, fetch the pipeline config, and start your first CI run. You can head over to the Woodpecker UI to watch the build logs in real time.

Reviewer 3: what if that does not work for me, where can I look to debug?

Author: Normally you would look into the console for the logs as we have enabled `WOODPECKER_LOG_LEVEL=debug`. Do you also want me to add that in this section?

> Once the PR is created, Woodpecker will automatically send the build request to WCCS, fetch the pipeline config, and start your first CI run. You can head over to the Woodpecker UI to watch the build logs in real time.

Reviewer 5: Once the PR is created, Woodpecker will automatically send a build request to WCCS, fetch the pipeline configuration, and start your first CI run. You can then head over to the Woodpecker UI to watch the build logs in real time.

> Once the PR is created, Woodpecker will automatically send the build request to WCCS, fetch the pipeline config, and start your first CI run. You can head over to the Woodpecker UI to watch the build logs in real time.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Once the PR is created, Woodpecker will automatically send a build request to WCCS, fetch the pipeline configuration, and start your first CI run. You can then head over to the Woodpecker UI to watch the build logs in real time.
```

      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-secure.entrypoints=websecure"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-secure.tls.certresolver=letsencrypt"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-secure.tls=true"
      - "traefik.http.services.woodpecker-secure.loadbalancer.server.port=8000"
      # HTTP router + redirect to HTTPS
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.rule=Host(`your-ci-server`)"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.entrypoints=web"
      - "traefik.http.routers.woodpecker-http.middlewares=redirect-to-https"
      # Redirect middleware
      - "traefik.http.middlewares.redirect-to-https.redirectscheme.scheme=https"
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

  woodpecker-agent:
    image: woodpeckerci/woodpecker-agent:v3
    command: agent
    restart: always
    depends_on:
      - woodpecker-server
    volumes:
      - woodpecker-agent-config:/etc/woodpecker
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    environment:
      - WOODPECKER_LOG_LEVEL=debug
      - WOODPECKER_SERVER=woodpecker-server:9000
      - WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET=${WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET}
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net
```

> ## Authenticating with GitHub
> 
> To connect GitHub with Woodpecker:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Authenticating with GitHub

Woodpecker cannot do anything by itself, it needs a forge (the service where the repositories are hosted). Woodpecker supports [various forges](https://woodpecker-ci.org/docs/administration/configuration/forges/overview), for this blog post we will focus on GitHub.
To connect GitHub with Woodpecker:
```

1. Register a new OAuth application in your GitHub developer [settings](https://github.com/settings/applications/new).

2. In your GitHub OAuth App, set the authorization callback URL to `https://<your-ci-server>/authorize`

![Callback URL](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/oauth.png)

3. Copy the generated Client ID and Secret.

4. Use these values in the `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_CLIENT` and `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_SECRET` env vars.

After that, you can log into the Woodpecker web UI using your GitHub account.

![GitHub Login](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/github.png)

## Enabling a Repository
From the Woodpecker UI:

> - Click on Add Repository.

Reviewer 3: which one do I take?
maybe have somewhere higher up a step saying to create an empty repository, or some repo with example code that can be cloned

![Add Repo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/add.png)

- Enable it.

![Enable Repo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/enable.png)

Woodpecker will automatically add the necessary webhooks to the repo.

## Generating the Public Key

> Before running any pipeline, woodpecker server needs send POST request to an external config service which, in our case, is WCCS with all current config file and build information of the current repository. The external service will then send back new pipeline configurations. For example, starlark is being converted into yaml configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before running any pipeline, woodpecker server sends a POST request to an external config service (in our case WCCS) with all current config file and build information of the current repository. The external service takes that information and sends back pipeline configurations. In our case, that is how a starlark fie is being converted into yaml configurations.
```

You can easily deploy WCCS using their official Docker image available on Docker Hub: [opencloudeu/wccs](https://hub.docker.com/r/opencloudeu/wccs).
Update your `docker-compose.yml` to include the WCCS service:
```yml
  wccs:
    image: opencloudeu/wccs:latest
    container_name: wccs
    command: server
    environment:
      - WCCS_LOG_LEVEL=debug
      - WCCS_SERVER_PUBLIC_KEY=/keys/public.pem
    volumes:
      - /opt/woodpecker/keys:/keys
      - /etc/ssl/certs:/etc/ssl/certs:ro
    labels:
      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.http.routers.wccs.rule=Host(`your-wccs-server`)"
      - "traefik.http.routers.wccs.entrypoints=websecure"
      - "traefik.http.routers.wccs.tls.certresolver=letsencrypt"
      - "traefik.http.services.wccs.loadbalancer.server.port=8080"
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

volumes:
  woodpecker-server-data:
  woodpecker-agent-config:

networks:
  woodpecker-net:
    driver: bridge
```

## Connecting WCCS with Woodpecker
To allow Woodpecker to fetch pipeline configs from WCCS, we added this to the server env:
```console
WOODPECKER_CONFIG_SERVICE_ENDPOINT=http://wccs:8080/ciconfig
```

> Woodpecker now sends a signed JSON payload to WCCS whenever a build is triggered. WCCS verifies the signature using the public key and responds with a YAML pipeline based on your .woodpecker.star file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Woodpecker now sends a signed JSON payload to WCCS whenever a build is triggered. WCCS verifies the signature using the public key and responds with a YAML pipeline based on your `.woodpecker.star` file.
```

> After conneting WCCS with woodpecker server, there's one more thing that you need to do i.e. to set pipeline config path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After conneting WCCS with the woodpecker server, there's one more thing that you need to do i.e. to set pipeline config path, because by default Woodpecker will take .... as its pipeline configurations.
```

- From the settings of your Woodpecker server, go to `Repositories` and click on the enabled repo's settings icon as shown below:

![Settings](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/settings.png)

- Then, add `.woodpecker.star` as pipeline config path and save it:

![Pipeline Config](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/path.png)

## Add a Simple Starlark Pipeline
Here's a simple `.woodpecker.star` example that you can add in your project's root and you're all set:
```console
def main(ctx):
    return [{
        "name": "hello",
        "steps": [
            {
                "name": "greeting",
                "image": "alpine",
                "commands": [
                    "echo Hello from CI",
                ],
                "when": {
                    "event": ["push", "pull_request"],
                    "branch": ["master"],
                },
            }
        ]
    }]
```

## Triggering Your First CI Run

> Now that you have your `.woodpecker.star` file ready, commit and push it to your GitHub repository and then, open a Pull Request from your branch <your-branch-name> to master.

Reviewer 3: so the branch name has to be `master` (as defined in the .star file), that would have been a useful information at the beginning. because if I've created a demo repo at the start, GitHub would have made the default branch called `main`

Author: I have updated by mentioning `master/main`

---
title: Starlark-Powered Pipelines in Woodpecker CI
authorName: Prashant Gurung
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/53248463?v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/prashant-gurung899
createdAt: July 3, 2025
tags: CI/CD, Woodpecker, starlark, docker-compose, Traefik, WCCS
banner: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/cover.png
---

## Background

> Continuous Integration tools are essential to build and test modern software automatically and regularly. Woodpecker CI is one such open-source tool, a lightweight CI/CD system. Woodpecker CI is an open-source continuous integration and delivery system that help developers in automating deployment, builds, and testing of code. It's an open-source fork and alternative to the popular Drone CI project with numerous design similarities and Drone pipeline compatibility. Traditionally, Woodpecker pipelines are YAML, but now that programmable pipelines are in vogue, we can finally have the liberty of defining our CI configuration through Starlark — a Python-ish config language.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Continuous Integration tools are essential to build and test modern software automatically and regularly. Woodpecker CI is one such open-source tool, a lightweight CI/CD system. [Woodpecker CI](https://woodpecker-ci.org/) is an open-source continuous integration and delivery system that help developers in automating deployment, builds, and testing of code. It's an open-source fork and alternative to the popular Drone CI project with numerous design similarities and Drone pipeline compatibility. Traditionally, Woodpecker pipelines are YAML, but now that programmable pipelines are in vogue, we can finally have the liberty of defining our CI configuration through Starlark — a Python-ish config language.
```

      - WOODPECKER_CONFIG_SERVICE_ENDPOINT=http://<your-config-service-server>
    volumes:
      - woodpecker-server-data:/var/lib/woodpecker/
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

  woodpecker-agent:
    image: woodpeckerci/woodpecker-agent:v3
    restart: always
    depends_on:
      - woodpecker-server
    volumes:
      - woodpecker-agent-config:/etc/woodpecker
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    environment:
      - WOODPECKER_LOG_LEVEL=debug
      - WOODPECKER_SERVER=woodpecker-server:9000
      - WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET=${WOODPECKER_AGENT_SECRET}
    networks:
      - woodpecker-net

volumes:
  woodpecker-server-data:
  woodpecker-agent-config:

networks:
  woodpecker-net:
    driver: bridge
```

## Traefik Configuration for HTTPS
So far our woodpecker server runs on HTTP, so to serve it on HTTPS we are going to configure Traefik.
Traefik plays a crucial role in this architecture by handling all the networking complexities - SSL termination, routing, and load balancing.
Add the following Traefik service right above the `woodpecker-server` service in the same `docker-compose.yml` file:

```yml

> version: "3.9"

Reviewer 3: the version key is obsolete and can be removed

To connect GitHub with Woodpecker:

1. Register a new OAuth application in your GitHub developer [settings](https://github.com/settings/applications/new).

2. In your GitHub OAuth App, set the authorization callback URL to `https://<your-ci-server>/authorize`

![Callback URL](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/oauth.png)

3. Copy the generated Client ID and Secret.

4. Use these values in the `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_CLIENT` and `WOODPECKER_GITHUB_SECRET` env vars.

After that, you can log into the Woodpecker web UI using your GitHub account.

![GitHub Login](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/github.png)

## Enabling a Repository
Before enabling a repo in the Woodpecker CI server, make sure to have a GitHub repository ready. You can use an existing repo of your own or create a new empty one. We will be making a pull request to the repo to trigger CI later.

From the Woodpecker UI:

- Click on Add Repository.

![Add Repo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/woodpecker-ci-starlark/src/assets/woodpeckerCI/images/add.png)

> - Enable it. For this blog, I am using an existing repo called `Drum-KIT` which has already been enabled(as you can see in the last row of the image below).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enable it. For this blog, I am using an existing repo called `Drum-KIT` which has already been enabled (as you can see in the last row of the image below).
```
